---
title: 'Cursory Mathematical Analysis of MYHockey Rankings Algorithm (Part 2)'
date: 2024-02-26
permalink: /posts/2024/02/myhockey2/
tags:
  - cool posts
---

After discussing the MYHockey algorithm with my uncle, I learned that one of the assumptions in my previous analysis is wrong. In particular, the rating associated with the strength of a team's opponents is not computed from static values from a previous time, but they are updated with every game result.

As before, $r$ is the vector of ratings for the different teams and $\Delta$ is the vector whose $i$'th element is the number of goals scored by team $i$ minus it's number of goals yielded. $S$ is the matrix where the element $S_{i,j}$ represents how many times team $j$ played team $i$. Lastly, $n$ is the vector whose $i$'th element is the number of games played by team $i$ (Note that $n=S1$). I now believe that ratings are computed as the solution to the system of equations of the form:

$$
\begin{align}
r&=diag(n)^{-1}\left(\Delta + Sr\right)
\end{align}
$$

This system can be rewritten as:

$$
\begin{align*}
\left( diag(n) - S \right)r &= \Delta
\end{align*}
$$

If the game schedule is interpreted as a weighted graph with edge weights equal to the number of games played between a pair of teams, the matrix on the lefthand side of the above equation is the Laplacian of this graph.

Ratings do not change when goal differences match rating differences
------------
<b>Proof</b>

Consider, without loss of generality, the case where a single game is played between team $i$ and team $j$ and the game differential and score matrix for this game only are represented by $\Delta'$ and $S'$ respectively. Also, diag(n') is the matrix that is completely zero except for a one at positions $(i,i),(j,j)$.

$$
\begin{align}
\left( diag(n) - S_{old} \right)r_{old} &= \Delta_{old} \\
\left( diag(n)+diag(n') - S_{old}-S' \right)r_{new} &= \Delta_{old}+\Delta' \\
\text{Subtract (2) form (3)} \nonumber \\
(diag(n)-S_{old})(r_{new}-r_{old})+(diag(n')-S')r_{new}&= \Delta' 
\end{align}
$$

If we assume that ratings are unchanged, then we can plug in $r_{new}=r_{old}=0$ to Eq. 4 and getgives:

$$
\begin{align*}
(diag(n')-S')r_{old}&= \Delta' \\
r_{old,i}-r_{old,j}&= \Delta'_i 
\end{align*}
$$

which means that ratings are unchanged when goal differences match rating differences. If we re-arrange Eq. 4:

$$
\begin{align}
(diag(n)-S_{old})(r_{new}-r_{old})&= \Delta' - (diag(n')-S')r_{new}
\end{align}
$$

The right hand side clearly has only two nonzero elements

$\blacksquare$